Original Version: [JCHA.IN](https://jcha.in/t/HxWBzZTLw), [Flea Academy](https://fleaacademy.com/m/54864759)

The contravariant Hom functor $h^\\textbf 2$ convert a set to its power set. This is the most simple situation. If the set $A$ is equipped with some mathematical structure, we can obtain more from $h^A$.

### Free Abelian Group

Let $\\textbf{Ab}$ denote the **category of abelian groups**. $(\\mathbb Z,+,0) \\in \\textbf{Ab}$ is the most studied abelian group. Given a set, the contravariant Hom functor yields not only a hom-set but also an abelian group:

$$
\\begin{align}
h^\\mathbb Z: \\textbf{Set} &\\to \\textbf{Ab} \\\\
X &\\mapsto h^\\mathbb Z X = \\mathbb Z^X =  \\textbf{Set}(X,\\mathbb Z)\\\\
\\end{align}
$$

to illustrate this, suppose $X = \\{a,b,c\\}$ and $A\\subset X$ a subset. Recall the role of the characteristic function plays in power set. The singletons of $X$, applying the characteristic functions, becomes a basis. With necessary alteration, here is the $\\mathbb R$-version of the characteristic function: 
 
$$
\\begin{align}
A: X &\\to \\mathbb Z \\\\
x &\\mapsto A(x) = \\begin{cases} 1 &,\\ x \\in A \\\\ 0 &,\\ x \\notin A \\end{cases}
\\end{align}
$$

For the singletons:

$$
\\{a\\}
= \\begin{bmatrix}a \\in \\{a\\}\\\\ b\\in \\{a\\} \\\\ c \\in \\{a\\}\\end{bmatrix}
= \\begin{bmatrix}1\\\\ 0 \\\\ 0\\end{bmatrix},\\ 

\\{b\\}
= \\begin{bmatrix}a \\in \\{b\\}\\\\ b\\in \\{b\\} \\\\ c \\in \\{b\\}\\end{bmatrix}
= \\begin{bmatrix}0\\\\ 1 \\\\ 0\\end{bmatrix},\\ 


\\{c\\}
= \\begin{bmatrix}a \\in \\{c\\}\\\\ b\\in \\{c\\} \\\\ c \\in \\{c\\}\\end{bmatrix}
= \\begin{bmatrix}0\\\\ 0 \\\\ 1\\end{bmatrix}
$$

This is almost the same computational basis $E = \\{e_i\\}$  for the power set $\\textbf 2^X$. Using the same notation, let the computational basis be $\\mathbb Z$-valued column vectors, i.e.

$$
e_1 = \\begin{bmatrix}1\\\\0\\\\0\\end{bmatrix}, \\ 
e_2 = \\begin{bmatrix}0\\\\1\\\\0\\end{bmatrix}, \\ 
e_3 = \\begin{bmatrix}0\\\\0\\\\1\\end{bmatrix}
\\in \\mathbb Z_3
$$

$\\forall v \\in \\mathbb Z_3$ there is a unique $\\mathbb Z$-coefficient linear combination s.t.

$$
v = \\sum_i \\lambda_i e_i,\\ \\lambda_i \\in \\mathbb Z
$$

Obviously let $m=|X|$

$$
|\\mathbb Z_m| = |\\mathbb Z|^m = |\\mathbb Z^X| 
$$

and

$$
\\mathbb Z_m \\simeq \\mathbb Z^X 
$$

There is an obvious additive structure between the column vectors, making $(\\mathbb Z_m,+,0) \\in \\textbf{Ab}$ an abelian group. This structure is isomorphic to $(\\mathbb Z^X,+,0) \\in \\textbf{Ab}$ using pointwise addition for all the functions.

$\\mathbb Z^X$ is the **free abelian group** generated by $X$ as the basis. There is also a natural embedding:

$$
X \\hookrightarrow \\mathbb Z^X
$$

From the perspective of column vectors, a basis vector is embedded into the column vector space:

$$
e_i \\in \\mathbb Z_m
$$

### Free Linear Space

Given a set. Using a field, for example the field of complex numbers $\\mathbb C$, the contravariant Hom functor yields not only a hom-set but also an complex linear space:

$$
\\begin{align}
h^\\mathbb C: \\textbf{Set} &\\to \\textbf{Vct}_\\mathbb C \\\\
X &\\mapsto h^\\mathbb C X = \\mathbb C^X =  \\textbf{Set}(X,\\mathbb C)\\\\
\\end{align}
$$

With necessary alteration, here is the $\\mathbb C$-version of the characteristic function: 
 
$$
\\begin{align}
A: X &\\to \\mathbb C \\\\
x &\\mapsto A(x) = \\begin{cases} 1 &,\\ x \\in A \\\\ 0 &,\\ x \\notin A \\end{cases}
\\end{align}
$$

Applying singletons of $X$ we can obtain the computational basis. Then straightforwardly a complex linear space with complex vector space representation:
$$
h^\\mathbb C X = \\mathbb C^X \\simeq \\mathbb C_m
$$ 


### Free Functor

$h^\\textbf 2$, $h^\\mathbb Z$, $h^\\mathbb C$ are all contravariant Hom functors that generate mathematical structures from the give set as the basis. This procedure is quite standard in the perspective of category theory. So $h^A$, regardless what $A$ is, is often called the **free functor**.

In this lecture notes, we have special interest about the column representation of the generated mathematical structures.

$$
h^A X = A^X \\simeq A_m,\\ m = |X|
$$

Over the $A$-column vector space, we can talk about the standard linear algebra.
